hey it's Jake and today we are gonna be
diving deep into the source wrecked at
time expression we're gonna pick it all
apart figure out what makes it work and
why it's going to make your life easier
[Music]
if you've ever wanted to make some kind
of a templatized graphic that was based
on a text layer size and dynamically
changes with whatever the text is doing
you need source wrecked it time to make
that happen now there's definitely a
learning curve to this expression it
seems pretty complicated and
overwhelming at first because there are
a lot of options but it's a very
powerful expression and it's my goal
that by the end of this tutorial you'll
have a firm grasp on how it works all of
the parameters of it and how you can use
it to make some pretty cool stuff so
what a source wrecked it time actually
do for us why is it useful well it will
return one of four values it'll give you
the width or height of any layer as well
as the top and left edge and those last
two are gonna be for a very unique
scenario that we'll get to in just a
little bit but first let's just start
with the width and height if I were to
make a box obviously we know the size of
that because there is a size property
it's 1920 by 1080 I could turn this down
to 500 and the width is gonna be 281
that's not hard to determine but on a
layer like this a text layer there is no
property in any of these drop-down menus
that's gonna tell me the exact width and
height of that layer so I can use this
expression source rect at time to tell
me the width or the height and to show
you how this all works I'm gonna be
making a box that sizes to this text and
follows it around no matter what it will
always stay right behind it all right so
I'll take this box and I'm going to go
to the size property and start writing
an expression by pressing option or alt
clicking on that stopwatch and I'll give
myself a little bit more room here and
we need to start defining some variables
so if you don't know the variable is
it's just basically a placeholder for
expression code so that I can kind of
create my own shorthand to reference
later on in the code so we'll start
typing in my expression I'm going to say
var for variable s for
source equals and that s for source that
is totally made-up by me you can name
your variables whatever you want so I'm
just making mine as short as possible s
for source and I want to use the
expression pick whip to select my text
layer so that is my source I'll finish
that off with a semicolon
then I'm gonna add another variable and
I'm gonna call it W for width and this
is where I'm gonna use my first source
rec to time expression so I'll start by
saying s which is the variable I just
defined so this text layer dot source
rect at time and that capitalization is
very important
99% of the time in expression code the
first word of an expression is lowercase
and the rest is capitalized so that's
called camelcase but we've got s dot
source rekted time open parentheses
close parentheses dot width and that's
how I tell the source rekted time that i
want to find the width of that rectangle
and not the height but I do want to know
the height so I'm going to copy this
line drop down and make another variable
this time changing it to H and instead
of width say height so now I've got W
which will contain the source width of
this text layer and H which will contain
the height of that source text layer and
now that I have those variables defined
I'll drop down and write an array so
opening bracket W for width comma H for
height close bracket and I'll do a
semicolon to finish off that line of
code and if you don't know what an array
is it's just a set of numbers instead of
a single number so we look at the size
property this has two numbers the X and
y the width and the height of that size
and they're separated by a comma so to
get aftereffects
to know how to fill out those two
individual properties I have to write
them in an array or within these square
brackets and divide it by a comma all
right now that that's all set I can
click off and instantly my size changes
it's now 880 by 79 that looks about the
same size as this text so I'm just going
to click and drag while holding down
command to temporarily snap and then
I'll just move
that box below the text layer there we
go it looks like that box is perfectly
sized to the text goes to the top and
bottom edges and I have a stroke on
there actually so I'm going to turn that
all the way down to zero and there you
go you can see it fits perfectly on the
edges wherever the farthest out parts of
this text layer are that's what this box
is sighs - that's great it seems like
it's working just fine I'll rename this
text box and I'm gonna change the color
to red and the text color to white and
I'm just gonna rename this text all
right so now that the box is sizing
properly I should be able to type in
anything I want and look at that the box
is following the size of the text and it
looks like there are a couple of issues
like up here that a isn't touching even
though that looks like it's the top part
of the text and the Y&G are getting cut
off so we're definitely gonna have to
revisit the code a little bit and
another issue that I'm running into is
that this is Center justified text and
it looks like it's working just fine but
if I change this to left justified and
then you know realign this up so that
they're both centered on each other and
I type in something else that is not
lining up at all as I type I'll just do
one character at a time you see that the
box and I'll make this dark so we can
see it easier but as I type the box is
scaling from the center even though the
text is coming from the left to right
since it's left justified so how can we
get around these issues what we'll just
be a little bit clever with some
properties in our shape layer so I'm
going to open this up go into the
contents rectangle rectangle path and
basically what I want to happen is for
this to shoot off to the right as the
text is expanding so that instead of
scaling from the center it's scaling
from the left edge but this size is
constantly changing which means this
anchor point for the shape layer will
constantly have to change so I need to
base this number on the size of the box
you see that I just kind of manually
lined that up and this number 324 is
basically half of 647 or the width
the reason that number is half is
because when it's at zero anchor point
is dead center in the shape layer so
taking half of the entire width would be
the same as the distance from this point
to here so I should be able to just
divide the size by two and plug that
straight into the position and that will
move my anchor point to the top left
corner of the box no matter what size
the box is so let's do that I'll hold
down option and click on the position
stopwatch and just pick with the size
and say divided by two apply that and
there we go our box shifts over now the
anchor point is in the top left corner
of this box and if I now just move the
layer over a hold command again to snap
to the top left corner it's lined up and
now I can type and it will work just
fine and to keep this text box with the
text all I have to do is parent it to
that text layer now it'll move around
with that type okay so that seems like
it's working just fine but let's say I
want to change the size of my type
suddenly that box is not following the
type anymore the reason for this is
because of the way that text layers
behave you see that the bounding box so
is all the way out here but the anchor
point is right here down on the bottom
left now this is because that's where
the origin of the text is it's the
baseline that's where most of the text
rests but you can have things like
descenders like this Y here that goes
below it but because it's a text layer
it's going to scale off of that anchor
point and I don't mean if I were to
change this anchor point and change the
text size that's going to scale off that
anchor point but by default the text
layers anchor point lines up with that
origin of the text layer on the baseline
so when I change the size of the text
that's where it's scaling from whereas
our text box is scaling from the
top-left corner so it's still taking the
correct size from the text layer it's
just scaling it off of a point that
isn't quite right and this is where the
top and left parts of source rect at
time are going to come into play the
source rect at time top expression will
give us the distance between the top
edge of the layer and the baseline
and the left part a source wrecked a
time will give us the distance between
the left edge of the layer and the
origin we can use those two numbers to
offset the anchor point of our text box
so that it scales from where it needs to
so the size expression is working just
fine but I need to add some more
variables to my position expression so
I'm gonna go in here and edit this and
I'll just copy this one to make it a
little bit quicker and paste it here
change H to L for left and then get rid
of this height divided by 2 and type in
left and then I'll copy and paste that
change it to T and top now that I have
those accessible I can put them into my
expression so what I want to do is add
the left edge to the width so width plus
L and I want to add the top edge to the
height so height plus top if I apply
that the box shifts up but if I click on
it you can see the anchor point is now
existing in this bottom left area of
very near where the anchor point for the
text layer is so I'll just grab this
layer hold command and snap it to the
anchor point of that type layer and it
lines up perfectly again now if I change
the font size you see the box scales
with it perfectly if I change the type
of font or the font completely it will
always fit I can even change the
justification and that box is always
gonna fit exactly around that text so we
fix that issue no matter what it's
always going to work and because it's
parented it will move with the text and
I have a working text box now let's say
that you don't want it to be directly on
the edges of the text that is a little
bit close for comfort so we want to
expand it out a little bit well I could
go in to the size and add some manual
padding into this like width plus 10
type plus 10
and that'll push out the edges a little
bit but that's annoying to me I don't
like having to type in hard coded
numbers like that
so instead because this is a shape layer
I'm just gonna go to add and say offset
paths now I can just simply control them
margin with a single amount of property
so if I want 10 pixel margin all the way
around that text there we go alright
that's great but let's say that we want
to animate this text I mean one of the
best uses of source rect to time is for
making templates that follow text
dynamically so let's just add a quick
animator to this text this is one that I
made up it's just going to animate the
text on from left to right as I play
this back you'll notice that the box is
sizing with it and that is great maybe
that's exactly what you want it to be
but as I scrub through this you'll
notice that the box is scaling
vertically as well as horizontally and
maybe you don't want the box to scale
vertically like that maybe you want it
to stay the same width as it is once the
animation is finished well there's
actually a little bit more to source
rect at time so let me type this out one
more time so we can see it nice and
clear source rect at time open close
parenthesis and a semicolon these open
and close parentheses actually aren't
there for nothing we can put some values
in here to control how the expression is
actually working there are two possible
values you can put in here the first one
is time and then a comma and the second
one is extense
so let's just focus on time for a second
what that's going to let us do is
determine at what point in time in our
composition that it's looking at the
width or the height or the top or the
left edge if we leave these parenthesis
open
and it's going to default to a time of
time which translates to the current
time whatever frame you're on that's
what the source rector time value is
going to be looking at so that's why the
box is scaling with the text because at
the beginning the text is smaller and it
grows out to the right so every frame
it's looking at whatever the width and
height of that text layer is at the
given time but I could change this to
say 1 and that would mean source rect at
time at 1 second which is after this
animation is completed so why don't we
just do that I'll double tap you to
bring up my expressions this is the one
for the size that's the one I'm really
concerned with the height I want this to
be source rect at time not at the
current time but at 1 second I'll click
off of that and now if I play this back
see the box is staying the same height
now we're still getting some weird
issues here at the beginning it's
shifting up and down and that's because
of the way that this position expression
is working with the top edge and the
actual height so I need to add that one
in to my height source rec to time
expression as well as the top value so
it's looking at the 1 second value for
those variables and now you see that the
box height isn't changing and it isn't
shifting up and down however it is
shifting left and right as this first
layer is scaling up so I also need to go
to that left edge and type 1 in there
and now it's almost working but before I
go any further trying to get this to
work I want to point out an issue that
this brings up when you're hard coding
in numbers like this say I want to make
my animation longer than one second
maybe I want it to be one and a half
seconds well now it's gonna be looking
at the height at one second and in this
particular case that's not actually an
issue because the tallest part of the
text has increased by that point but the
point is hard-coding in numbers like
this kind of limits you so instead of
using that hard-coded number I want to
put in something a little bit more
dynamic so let's say that my text layer
gets trimmed down to three seconds I can
reference that out point in my
expressions and use it as that time
indicator so where the source rect
is pulling its value from so instead of
saying one second I'm going to say s
which is the text layer dot out point
that's going to return the time value
for the out point of that layer so it's
looking at that outpoint for the height
of that text layer then I'll just copy
that and replace all of these ones with
that same value
and the animation doesn't look any
different but it is much more flexible
now it's always going to look at the end
of my animation which should be after
the animation is completed but let's say
that I want to animate the Box on
slightly differently than the text maybe
the motion isn't exactly what I want
maybe I want the box to come out quicker
than the text well in that case then I'm
not going to want the width to follow
that text size either so I'll jump into
the size expression go to the width
source rect it time and change this to s
dot out point as well for the width and
I'll do it down here for the position as
well so now all of my source rec to time
expressions are looking at the out point
of the layer to find its values from and
if I scrub this back now you can see my
text is animating on the box size
however is never changing that's great
because now I can move this text forward
and then let's say I want to have that
box scale out from the left but take a
little bit more time so I'll collapse
the layer maybe go into the transform
controls for this rectangle and because
the Anchor Point is on the left edge I
should be able to just animate the X
scale to scale that up now if i zoom in
here nice and close you can see that's
actually giving me a little bit of an
issue because it's scaling from this
point right here and my offset paths is
pushing the margin outwards so I need to
shift the anchor points so that it isn't
right here but it's actually over here
on the edge it's accounting for the left
edge as well as the offset path so I'm
going to borrow again some of the
expressions from my position property
I'll just copy all the variables and
delete what I don't need so I'll start
with the Anchor Point option click and
paste I don't actually need the width or
the height just the top and left edges
then I need another variable which is
the offset pads amount so I'm going to
type another variable in here
er / offset equals and then expression
pick whip the amount there we go and now
I'll write my array so I want the anchor
point of this box to be the left edge
for the width
- the offset comma
edge for the height
- the offset as well close bracket
semicolon and apply now my box gets
moved around so it's not where it needs
to be anymore but I can counteract that
using the position very simply I'm just
gonna make the position the exact same
values as the anchor point so I add an
expression expression pick whip the
anchor point and apply it and now the
box is back where it needs to be and we
can see that shape layer anchor point
for this rectangle is now in the very
top left corner so if I grab my scale
the X scale now it is scaling off of
that left edge because it is accounting
for this offset as well as the top and
left edge offset with that done I can
now add some animation to this layer so
I'll go to the scale property set the x
value down to zero to add a keyframe go
forward maybe a second and then change
it back up to 100% then I'll just really
increase this YZ and see how that looks
so there we go now my animation for this
shape layer happens independently of the
text but it's based on the width of that
text after it's been completely animated
so I can change this and the box is
still gonna animate to that size let's
say that I wanted to add a little bit of
overshoot to this maybe just make it a
little bit more bouncy I'll grab that
keyframe and I'm using motion - from
mount mograph but this is just gonna add
a quick overshoot and that's obviously
way too much maybe we'll turn up the
friction turn down the overshoot
but now that comes out and the text
follows so you can really customize the
way that this is animating out but it's
completely dynamic based on the text
that you type in again you can change
the font to whatever you want you can
change the size of it and the box is
always going to size perfectly to it but
now that I've got my text animated on
let's say I want it to animate back off
I'll go to my range selector add a
keyframe on the start value and then
animate that to 100 and then I'll just
add some easing to it and it animates
off but something broke my box is no
longer showing up well that's because we
told all of our expressions to base the
source rect at time at the out point of
this text layer which now is nothing the
text is gone so it's looking at a source
rect at time that is zero so how do we
correct for that what we're going to do
a little bit more clever math to make it
happen so just like we can target the
out point of a layer we can also target
the end point if we can know both of
those values then we can find what the
exact middle point of a layer would be
which would give me a point in time on
this layer that the text is completely
visible for so let me double tap e to
bring up the expressions on my text box
and I need to add in some more variables
for the size so let me go into this and
underneath the source I'm just gonna add
a new variable var start equals
s dot in point
and then var end equals s dot out point
then I'll make one more variable and
type var mid equals the end or the out
point minus the start / to close that
off now what I'm trying to do here is
find the difference between the start
and end values and that will tell me the
duration and then divide that number by
2 which will give me the midway point of
that layer and that way it's based on
the in and out point so wherever the
layer is in time it'll subtract the end
point from that endpoint giving me the
duration of the layer and then half it
to give me the midpoint of the layer
however the way I wrote this isn't
actually gonna work because of the order
of operations remember multiplication
and division is calculated before
addition and subtraction to get the
start to be subtracted from the end
before dividing I need to put the end
minus start in parentheses that way
it'll calculate that number and then
divide it by two so if that's my
midpoint that's the halfway point of the
layer I can now change the S dot out
point to be just mid because that
variable contains the halfway point in
time for that layer I'll just replace
all of this s dot out point with mid and
I'll just copy these variables before I
apply it and then I'll go into the
position expression and paste in those
variables and change all of these s
doubt points to mid swap all of them out
and now that text box jumps back to
where it should be and it's basing the
size on the text layer at the halfway
point right in the dead center which is
where the text is completely visible so
it's no longer being affected by the
animation in or out and the great thing
about this is now I could actually just
make a duplicate of this text box and
style a different so I'll call it
accents and maybe I'll turn off the fill
so I'll go into the rectangle turn off
that fill and make the stroke blue and
then I'll increase the stroke width so
it's got a little bit of depth and to
change the caps to round Brown join
and then increase the offset paths now
it's got this kind of outline around it
and I'll animate it with a trim paths so
I'll add a trim pads here
go to the beginning of my animation and
change the end value down to zero set a
keyframe I'll set a keyframe for the
offset as well I'll go forward 30 frames
change this to 100 change this to maybe
180 and then I'll copy and paste these
keyframes onto the start value as well
and shift these around a little bit and
it'll just ease everything nicely and
see how that looks
so I've got this animated line moving
around the box now I think that the
scale animation is messing with it a
little bit so I'll press you to bring up
the keyframes get rid of that scale and
maybe I'll get rid of the exciton the
original one as well but I'll leave the
keyframes just ease it manually and
forget about that overshoot but now that
box scales out and we've got this
animated line going around it and maybe
I don't like it starting down in the
bottom left corner I can just take the
offset and shift it around and now it's
coming from the bottom left edge so this
is very dynamic very customizable and
because it's all being based on that
source rect at time I can change this
text to say something else and it's
always going to update and fit that text
so it's very very powerful and it
doesn't have to be a square box either
because they're shape layers I could
just go in to the contents into the
rectangle and turn up the roundness so
it's kind of like this pill shape then
I'll just increase the offset so I've
got a little bit more margin and I'll do
the same thing for the accents and you
could even link up all of these
properties from the accents to the
original text box so that you wouldn't
have to change these manually
it opens up a lot of creative
possibilities so there we go we've got
something like that now I'll play it
these values until I've got something
that I'm completely happy with
at the end it's going to animate off
just like it should
now there's one more part to source
wrecked at time remember I said you
could put two values in here and the
second one was extents so we've got time
and extents extense is a little bit
confusing but I want to explain it just
so you know if you ever see this written
out you'll understand what it means I'm
going to turn off my other layers for
now so we can focus and the extents is
basically something like a stroke around
an object and I'm actually going to use
another text layer to kind of
demonstrate what these values are gonna
look like so if I add another text layer
I won't type anything in I can actually
add in an expression just like any other
property so I actually want to just
borrow some expressions that we've
already written out so I'll grab all of
these variables again I'll just get rid
of what I don't need and I'll paste that
into the source text so my source right
now is defined as this text layer I want
to change that to this source rect at
time layer so I'm going to replace that
code and now all these other variables
are being based on this layer instead of
this one so I'm gonna get rid of some of
this code I don't need any of this stuff
in here I won't need the left or the top
values just the width and the height and
I'll get rid of that divided by two so
I've got the source rect a time for the
width and height of this text layer
right up here and I want to display that
in my new text layer so I'll write down
some expression code right here to
display these values in a text layer so
I'm gonna start by putting in quotes
width equals
and then add a plus W for the source
rector time width plus height equals
plus h for the height on the source
rector time semicolon to end it off and
apply and I've got a whole bunch of text
showing up now so I'm going to scale
this down so it's easier to see
it looks like I've got a typo on height
and I also want to drop this height line
down so I'm going to go right between
width plus height and add a /n plus and
that will drop it down a line and there
we go now we've got two incredibly
accurate numbers for the width and
height of this layer now obviously this
is really hard to look at I don't need
to know these values to ten decimals I'm
just gonna round them off simply by
changing the variables a little bit so
I'm gonna wrap my width and height in
what's called a round variable to do
this you start by typing capital M for
math it's one of the very few times that
you have a capital letters starting off
the expression dot round
open parentheses and then all the code I
want and close parentheses and I'll do
the same thing for the height math dot
round open parentheses close parentheses
that will round off these numbers so
it's much much easier to see all right
with all of that work out of the way now
we can take a look at what this extents
is actually doing the value defaults to
being false so if you don't put anything
in here for the second value or if you
leave this blank it's going to default
to time and false so this time and false
is identical to not putting anything in
there so if the extents are false that
means it's not going to pay attention to
anything that's not affecting the
bounding box and that might seem a
little confusing so what I'll do real
quick is just draw you a box and then
add a stroke to it so if I increase this
stroke you'll notice the bounding box of
that shape layer is not changing I can
make this as big as I want and it's not
going to change so if I actually take
this little readout text layer that we
just made and I change the source to
being this box instead of this text I'll
just pick that new box
we get a width of 253 and a height of
253 and if I change this stroke nothing
changes however if I come into my
expressions at the source wrecked at
time I say time
,
true and I put that on the width and the
height
those numbers change and as I increase
or decrease this stroke you see that now
because the extents are true it is
accounting for that stroke in its
calculations so that's great to know for
shape layers it works great like that
but for whatever reason when you add a
stroke to a text layer and I'll turn off
my raid and M colors this is easier to
see if I increase the stroke of this
text layer the bounding box you can see
is also increasing not only that it's
increasing beyond what the stroke
actually is now I did a little bit of
research on this and I couldn't really
come up with a good answer as to why
this happens other than text layers are
just unique in the way that After
Effects is rendering them and this
bounding box is kind of representing the
canvas for which the text is actually
being generated so it's uniquely not
going to behave how you expect with a
text layer I think the easiest way to
think about it is just looking at the
bounding box if you're adding something
to a layer that's pushing pixels outside
of the bounding box those are the
extents and if you include them then
this source rect at time is going to
account for them if you don't it will
ignore them again the default is set to
false so if you just leave these empty
it's gonna look at the current time and
not include the extents and my number
drops down again this stroke isn't
changing anything all right I'll go
ahead and delete that box and that's
gonna give me an expression error
because I need to change my source back
to this text layer here there we go
apply it and now we're reading out the
width and height of this text box again
one final issue with this source rekted
time expression is that it does not
account for this scale of a layer the
scale of my text layer right now is 100%
if I scale it down the width and height
are not changing this could definitely
cause an issue if your text boxes and
accents or any other elements that
you're basing on the width and height of
a layer aren't parented to that layer
but we can just do a little bit of
simple math to account for that so I'll
go into my empty text layer double tap E
and I want to define one more variable
so var X scale equals and then
expression pick whip the source text
layers X scale value so I have that as a
variable now and I want to put that
above the width and height so that I can
now use it in my width and height
variables so I'm gonna go to the end of
this source rect at time width and say
times X scale divided by 100 I'll do
that for both the width and the height
I'll apply that and my numbers have not
changed but if I take the scale now and
scale this down see either the width and
height are being scaled down as well and
if I just check this math a little bit
by just drawing a quick box roughly
around the size of this text you were to
that stroke we can see I'll double tap
you that it is about 766 by 33 so we've
got 766 and 44 looks like my height was
a little bit off but I just manually
type in 44 there we go we know that this
box is sized correctly to that text so
the way that this is working is we're
just multiplying the width and height by
the scale or the scale factor and then
dividing it by 100 so effectively when
this is 100 it is multiplying the entire
width by 100 and then dividing it by 100
meaning that the number doesn't change
but as it scales down say 250 it's going
to multiply it by 50 and then divide
that number by 100 so if we just left it
at multiplying it by 50 it's obviously
gonna be 50 times bigger than it should
be
but because we divide it by 100 it
shifts the decimal point over and
preserves the proper width and height
and that's very very useful for making
these expressions much more flexible all
right there you have it hopefully now
you have a very firm grasp on the source
rekted time expression I found that it's
incredibly helpful for making things
like templates like a motion graphics
template that you're gonna hand off to
an editor you know a lower third that
has a design based on the text and
dynamically changes for whatever the
editor types in there is just incredibly
valuable and makes your life easier as a
moe
designer it's also just really great to
know how to find these specific values
and base other things off of them you
can position these boxes within a comp
based on the size and just tie them to
sliders that are percentages instead of
pixel values it opens up a lot of
possibilities so hopefully you got a lot
out of this tutorial thanks for watching
and I'll catch you in the next one